First rewrite of the uSubscription spec (#238)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: up-l3/usubscription/v3/README.adoc

The `uSubscription` service component provides this bookkeeping capability.  

== Publishers, Subscribers, Topics and Streamers

[#usubscription-publisher]
=== Publishers

Publishers make information available to the uProtocol network, typically by using the mechanisms provided by the uProtocol language library and up-transport implementation appropriate for their context. 

A Publisher in a uProtocol network ususally does not perform any additional actions beyond what is necessary to publish messages to the up-transport it is using.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-interaction-publisher~1"]
--
A Publisher in a uProtocol network *MAY* interact with their local uSubscription service instance to gather information about subscribers and subscriptions, e.g. via the `fetch_susbcribers()` method.

> --

Author: Good point, done.

--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `ue_id`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-uri-resource-id~1"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `resource_id`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-uri-version-major~1"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `ue_version_major`.
--

NOTE: As the major version is part of the URI identifying a message resource, a change in the major version of that message resource implies that Subscribers will have re-subscribe to the new messgage resource via the new message URI.

[#usubscription-streamer]
=== Streamers

Dispatchers of type link:../../../up-l2/dispatchers/README.adoc[uStreamer] have a special role in a uProtocol pubsub network, as they are responsible for forwarding published messages to remote systems if a Subscriber on that remote system subscribed to (locally published) messages. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-interaction-ustreamer~1"]
--
uStreamers *SHALL* use uSubscription service APIs (e.g. `fetch_subscribers()`, `fetch_subscriptions()`) for retrieving information about remote subscriptions.

> --

Author: agree

--

== Subscription Change Notifications

=== Default notification topic

As has been described in the link:#usubscription-local-remote-subscriptions[remote subscriptions section] above, uProtocol dispatchers (`uStreamers`) are expected to intelligently forward messages to remote systems in cases where a remote uEntity (and thus a remote uSubscription service instance) made a subscription request to our local uProtocol network. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-change-notification~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
To support this use case, uSubscription service *SHALL* make all subscription changes available as event messages, published on a topic specifically defined for this purpose.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-change-notification-type~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Subscription change messages *MUST* be of type https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/da5ca97d3a7541d2fcd52ed010bc3bcca92e46cb/up-core-api/uprotocol/core/usubscription/v3/usubscription.proto#L302[Update].
--

[#usubscription-default-notification-topic]

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-change-notification-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: `dsn~usubscribe-change-notification-topic~1`

--

> uSubscription service *SHALL* publish change notification messages to the topic

Reviewer: **MUST**?

 `/core.usubscription/3/subscriptions#Update`.
--

=== Custom notification topics

> In addition to publishing subscription change notifications on the link:#usubscription-default-notification-topic[default notification channel], uEntities may want to receive subscription change notifications on a topic of their choice. 

Reviewer: `xref`

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-register-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Clients *MAY* use `RegisterForNotifications()` to receive subscription change notification messages on a custom topic of their choice.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-unregister-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Clients *MAY* use `UnregisterForNotifications()` to stop receiving subscription change notification messages on a custom topic.

> --

Reviewer: instead of specifying what a client may do, we should specify what a uSubscription service MUST do, i.e. send notifications to the topic registered by a client ...

== Timeout & Retry Logic

Subscribe (and unsubscribe) to remote topics are handled by RPC calls between uSubscription services running on the different devices. Given that devices are not always connected to each other, the onus is on uSubscription service to ensure that a command is received in time. Below are the common retry and timeout policies for USubscription service implementations to follow:   

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-remote-max-timeout~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--

> Remote Subscribe/Unsubscribe requests *MUST* have a maximum timeout of 5 minutes

Reviewer: I wonder if we should instead define a _minimum_ time to wait instead ...

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-remote-retry-indefinitely~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--

> Timed-out remote commands *MUST* be retied indefinitely until the business logic behind it no longer requires the command to be sent (ex. the last subscriber calls unsubscribes from a topic that is in state `SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Timed-out remote commands *MUST* be retried indefinitely until the business logic behind it no longer requires the command to be sent (e.g. because the last entity unsubscribed from a topic that is in state `SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING`). 
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-remote-retry-link-up~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
Remote commands *MAY* be retried upon device to device connectivity (link up) and *MAY NOT* be tried when there is no device connectivity (link down).

> --

Reviewer: there is no requirement to meet here ...

Author: Removing this, no idea how this could be properly implemented anyways.

        local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING)
        local uSubscription-->>remote uSubscription: Subscribe(SubscriptionRequest)
        alt success
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
            remote uSubscription-->>remote NotificationTopic: Update(SUBSCRIBED)
            
            local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
            local uSubscription-->>local NotificationTopic: Update(SUBSCRIBED)
        else failure
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: SubscriptionResponse(UNSUBSCRIBED)

            local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(UNSUBSCRIBED)
            local uSubscription-->>local NotificationTopic: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
        end
    else follow-on subscription
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
        local uSubscription-->>local NotificationTopic: Update(SUBSCRIBED)    
    end
----

To allow the reverse flow (publication) to be properly multicast to local subscribers by the local disaptcher when it queries the local uSubscription for a list of local subscribers:

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-remote_subscribe-subscriber-change~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: `dsn~`

.Remote Unsubscribe Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant local uSubscription
        participant local NotificationTopic
    end
    box White Device2
        participant remote uSubscription
        participant remote NotificationTopic
    end
    
    uApp->>+local uSubscription: Unsubscribe(UnsubscribeRequest)
    alt success
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: Ok
        local uSubscription-->>local NotificationTopic: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
    else failure
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: Failure
    end

    opt last subscription
        local uSubscription-->>remote uSubscription: Unsubscribe(UnsubscribeRequest)
        alt success
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: Ok
            remote uSubscription-->>remote NotificationTopic: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
        else failure
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: Failure
        end
    end
----

To allow the reverse flow (publication) to be properly multicast to local subscribers by the local disaptcher when it queries the local uSubscription for a list of local subscribers:

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-remote_unsubscribe-subscriber-change~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: `dsn~`

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-uri-not-empty~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* not be empty.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-uri-authority~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `authority`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-uri-entity-id~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `ue_id`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-uri-resource-id~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `resource_id`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-uri-version-major~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription APIs *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `ue_version_major`.
--

NOTE: As the major version is part of the topic URI, a change in the major version requires Subscribers to (re-)subscribe to the updated topic URI in order to keep receiving messages for that topic.

[#usubscription-streamer]

> == Streamers

Reviewer 2: Maybe just mention that it is covered in the uStreamer specification

--

[#subscribe-operation]
=== Subscribe()

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-subscribe-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `Subscribe()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* persistenly (across service restarts) store the client as a subscriber of the provided topic.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When the subscription expiration time (defined in the `expire` field of `SubscriptionRequest.attributes`) is exceeded, uSubscription service *MUST* stop tracking the associated client-topic subscription.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-no-expiration~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a subscription request does not specify an expiration time, uSubscription service *MUST* track the associated client-topic subscription persistently (across service restarts).

Author: added

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-multiple~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already subscribing, uSubscription service *MUST* return a response message containing the current subscription status for this client-topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).

Author: good point, added

--
When uSubscription service sends a `Subscribe()` request to a remote uSubscription service, uSubscription service *MUST* set the subscription state for any client-topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-remote-response~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When uSubscription service receives a reply to a remote `Subscribe()` request, uSubscription service *MUST* set the subscription state for any client-topic combination involving the subscribed remote topic to match the subscription status response of the remote uSubscription service (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `UNSUBSCRIBED`).
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-unsubscribe-pending~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a remote topic that is in state `UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING`, uSubscription service *MUST* initiate the regular remote subscription process, i.e. send a subscription request to the remote uSubscription service and set status to `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* generate subscription change notifications that indicate any change of subscription state of the subscribed topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* generate subscription change notifications reflecting any changes to the subscription state of the subscribed topic.
```

--

== uSubscription Sequences

In the following section, we will elaborate on the various subscription flows for local and remote topics. When a consumer subscribes to a remote topic, it is the responsibility of the (local) uSubscription service to relay the subscription request to the remote uSubscription service as can be seen in the sequence diagrams below.

NOTE: Throughout this section we will use the sample topic `//Device1/uexample/1/resource#Event` to illustrate the various sequences. The above-mentioned topic will be replaced with `_topic_` in the diagrams

=== Subscription

Subscription flow will show how a subscriber can subscribe to the example topic when uApp is on the same device (local subscriptions) or remote device (remote subscriptions).

==== Within a uDevice

.Local Subscription Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant uSubscription

>         participant SubscriptionChange

Reviewer 2: Please remove the SubscriptionChange participant and send the Update directly to the subscriber

    end

    uApp->>+uSubscription: Subscribe(SubscriptionRequest)   

    alt success
        uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
        uSubscription--)SubscriptionChange: Update(SUBSCRIBED)
    else failure
        uSubscription-->>-uApp: SubscriptionResponse(UNSUBSCRIBED)
    end
----

==== Between uDevices

.Remote Subscription Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant local uSubscription
    end
    box White Device2
        participant remote uSubscription
        participant uEntity
    end
    
    uEntity->>+remote uSubscription: RegisterForNotification()
    uApp->>+local uSubscription: Subscribe(SubscriptionRequest)

    alt first subscription
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING)
        local uSubscription-->>remote uSubscription: Subscribe(SubscriptionRequest)
        alt success

>             remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)

Reviewer 2: We do not send SubscriptionResponse twice to the client as the RPC pattern is unary (and not a flow). When the local usubscriptionService receives the SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED), it will send the Update notification to the local subscriber

            remote uSubscription--)uEntity: Update(SUBSCRIBED)
            
            local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
            local uSubscription--)uApp: Update(SUBSCRIBED)
        else failure

>             remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: SubscriptionResponse(UNSUBSCRIBED)

Reviewer 2: Same from previous comment, this is a Update message and not a subscriptionResponse

            local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(UNSUBSCRIBED)
            local uSubscription-->>uApp: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
        end
    else follow-on subscription
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: SubscriptionResponse(SUBSCRIBED)
        local uSubscription--)uApp: Update(SUBSCRIBED)    
    end
    uEntity->>+remote uSubscription: UnregisterForNotification()
----

To allow the reverse flow (publication) to be properly multicast to local subscribers by the local disaptcher when it queries the local uSubscription for a list of local subscribers, remote subscriptions are always performed between uSubscription services using their own uEntity identifiers (`core.usubscription`). 

=== Unsubscribe

==== Within a uDevice

.Local Unsubscribe Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant uSubscription

>         participant SubscriptionChange

Reviewer 2: Remove the SubscriptionChange lifeline like we talked about.

    end

    uApp->>+uSubscription: Unsubscribe(UnsubscribeRequest)   

    uSubscription-->>uApp: Ok
    uSubscription--)SubscriptionChange: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
----

==== Between uDevices

.Remote Unsubscribe Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant local uSubscription

>         participant local SubscriptionChange

Reviewer 2: Remove the SubscriptionChange participant

    end
    box White Device2
        participant remote uSubscription

>         participant remote SubscriptionChange

Reviewer 2: Remove the remote SubscriptionChange participant

[#usubscription-subscriber]
== Subscriber

A _Subscriber_ is a uEntity that is interested in a particular _topic_ and wants to receive messages that have been published to that topic by other uEntities. Subscribers typically use the xref:../../../up-l2/api.adoc[Communication Layer API] for this purpose.

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-interaction-subscriber~1"]
--
In addition to performing the actions necessary to subscribe to and receive messages from the transport that they are using, Subscribers in a uProtocol network *MUST* invoke the <<subscribe-operation>> and <<unsubscribe-operation>> operations of their local uSubscription service instance in order to indicate which topics they _subscribe_ to or _unsubscribe_ from.
--

[#subscribe-operation]
=== Subscribe()

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-subscribe-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `Subscribe()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-subscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* store the client as a subscriber of the provided topic for the duration of the uSubscription service runtime (no persistency across service restarts).

Author: Wasn't aware of that - will put this in the spec.

Question: this is from the .proto file:
```
// **__NOTE:__** If this field is missing, assumed to live forever
  google.protobuf.Timestamp expire = 1;
```

I the expire field can be 'missing' - shouldn't that be marked 'optional' ?

--
The uSubscription service `Unsubscribe()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-unsubscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `Unsubscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* stop tracking the client as a subscriber to the topic provided with the function call.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-unsubscribe-multiple~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `Unsubscribe()` function for a topic that it has not subscribed to, uSubscription service *MUST* return a response message containing the subscription status `UNSUBSCRIBED`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-unsubscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When the last client subscribed to a topic calls the `Unsubscribe()` function on that topic, uSubscription service *MUST* stop generating subscription change notifications for that topic.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-unsubscribe-invalid-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `Unsubscribe()` request that contains a topic that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `Unsubscribe()` request that contains a topic that

```

> * is not a valid xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[uProtocol URI] or

Reviewer 2: The bullets are not correct, my suggestion should fix it, same for other parts of the spec

* contains a _wildcard_ authority or
* contains a _wildcard_ uEntity ID (`ue_id`) or
* contains a _wildcard_ resource ID,

a uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
--

[#fetch-subscribers-operation]
=== FetchSubscribers()

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscribers-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `FetchSubscribers()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscribers~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `FetchSubscribers()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* return a list of subscribers that are currently subscribed to a given topic.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-fetch-subscribers-invalid-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `FetchSubscribers()` request that contains a topic that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `FetchSubscribers()` request that contains a topic that

```

--

[#fetch-subscriptions-operation]
=== FetchSubscriptions()

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `FetchSubscriptions()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-by-subscriber~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `FetchSubscriptions()` function with a `SubscriberInfo` argument, uSubscription service *MUST* return a list of topics that are currently subscribed to by the given subscriber.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-by-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `FetchSubscriptions()` function with a topic UURI argument, uSubscription service *MUST* return a list of subscribers that are currently subscribed to the given topic.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-invalid-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `FetchSubscriptions()` request that contains a topic that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `FetchSubscriptions()` request that contains a topic that

```

--
If the list of subscriptions returned in response to a `FetchSubscriptions()` call does not contain all existing subscription relationships, uSubscription service *MUST* set the `has_more_records` field of the `FetchSubscriptionsResponse` to `true`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-stable-sorting~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Subscription entries returned by subsequent calls to the `FetchSubscriptions()` function *MUST* be in identical order.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-has-more-records~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
If the list of subscriptions returned in response to a `FetchSubscriptions()` call does not contain all existing subscription relationships, uSubscription service *MUST* set the `has_more_records` field of the `FetchSubscriptionsResponse` to `true`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-fetch-subscriptions-offset~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `FetchSubscriptions()` function with an `offset` argument, the list of subscriptions returned by uSubscription service *MUST* omit all subscription relationship entries up to the provided offset.
--

[#usubscription-topic]
== Topics

> A topic identifies the message resource that a link:#usubscription-subscriber[Subscriber] wants to subscribe to. Topic are expressed in xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[uProtocol URI] format.

Reviewer 2: Topic section probably should be at the beginning under overview or somewhere else as it is fundamental to the spec

Author: ok

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-state-remote-unsub-response-negative~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When receiving a negative response to the forwarded unsubscribe request, the local uSubscription service *MUST* set the topic state to `UNSUBSCRIBED_PENDING`.
--

== Subscription Change Notifications

=== Default notification topic

As has been described in the xref:usubscription-local-remote-subscriptions[remote subscriptions section] above, uProtocol dispatchers (`uStreamers`) are expected to intelligently forward messages to remote systems in cases where a remote uEntity (and thus a remote uSubscription service instance) made a subscription request to our local uProtocol network. 

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-change-notification~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
To support this use case, uSubscription service *MUST* make all subscription changes available as event messages, published on a topic specifically defined for this purpose.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-change-notification-type~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> Subscription change messages *MUST* be of type https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/da5ca97d3a7541d2fcd52ed010bc3bcca92e46cb/up-core-api/uprotocol/core/usubscription/v3/usubscription.proto#L302[Update].

Reviewer 2: Please see [usubscription.proto](https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/6b8c38b378daf9f4b8623b45e692e67517007a40/up-core-api/uprotocol/core/usubscription/v3/usubscription.proto#L38), the name is not the same but line 38 defines the explicit notification topic for subscription changes

Author: That's true, but this is not about the topic but the Update message type.

Reviewer 2: see previous clarification

--

[#usubscription-default-notification-topic]
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-change-notification-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
uSubscription service *MUST* publish change notification messages to the topic
 `/core.usubscription/3/subscriptions#Update`.
--

=== Custom notification topics

> In addition to publishing subscription change notifications on the xref:usubscription-default-notification-topic[default notification channel], uEntities may want to receive subscription change notifications on a topic of their choice. 

Reviewer 2: This is not true. Publishers manually register to receive subscription change notifications on the same notification topic (the one you mentioned above). the `RegisterForNotifications()` and `UnregisterForNotifications()` APIs are used to explicitly "opt-in" to receiving subscription notifications or not but that notification is always delivered to the same subscription change notification topic.  that is defined in [usubscription.proto](https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/6b8c38b378daf9f4b8623b45e692e67517007a40/up-core-api/uprotocol/core/usubscription/v3/usubscription.proto#L38).

Author: Ok explain this to me like I'm five years old: what exactly does this do, from the point of view of usubscription service? Because the service is publishing sub-change notifications to that topic anyways, for any subscription it is tracking - that is my understanding. 
So what would usubscription do on top of that, when a client does `RegisterForNotifications()`? Isn't it a client-side decision whether to opt-in to listening on that default topic?

Author: Ah - so the misunderstanding was that this mechanism actually has nothing to do with pubsub communication, but is saying "hey, direct-send me those updates, please!".
I was in pubsub country in my head for all of this... makes more sense now.

I assume it is allowed for clients to subscribe to topics that are not published by them?

[#register-for-notifications-operation]
==== RegisterForNotifications()

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-register-notifications-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `RegisterForNotifications()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-register-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client has registered to receive notifications on a custom topic via `RegisterForNotifications()`, uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change notification messages for any subscriptions of that client to that notification topic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* send subscription change notification messages when a producers call `RegisterForNotifications()` to _opt-in_ to receive notifications for a specific topic specified in `NotificationsRequest.topic` field. 
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-register-notifications-invalid-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `RegisterForNotifications()` request that contains a topic that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `RegisterForNotifications()` request that contains a topic that

```

* is not a valid xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[uProtocol URI] or
* contains a _wildcard_ authority or
* contains a _wildcard_ uEntity ID (`ue_id`) or
* contains a _wildcard_ resource ID,

a uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
--

[#unregister-for-notifications-operation]
==== UnregisterForNotifications()

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-unregister-notifications-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `UnregisterForNotifications()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-unregister-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> After they have unregistered to receive such custom notifications via `UnregisterForNotifications()`, uSubscription service *MUST* stop sending subscription change notification messages to clients on a custom topic of their choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uSubscription service *MUST* stop sending subscription change notifications when a producers _opts-out_ of receiving subscription change notification when they call `UnregisterForNotifications()`. 
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-unregister-notifications-invalid-topic~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `UnregisterForNotifications()` request that contains a topic that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `UnregisterForNotifications()` request that contains a topic that

```

* is not a valid xref:../../../basics/uri.adoc[uProtocol URI] or
* contains a _wildcard_ authority or
* contains a _wildcard_ uEntity ID (`ue_id`) or
* contains a _wildcard_ resource ID,

a uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
--

== Timeout & Retry Logic

Subscribe (and unsubscribe) to remote topics are handled by RPC calls between uSubscription services running on the different devices. Given that devices are not always connected to each other, the onus is on uSubscription service to ensure that a command is received in time. Below are the common retry and timeout policies for USubscription service implementations to follow:   

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-remote-max-timeout~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--

> Remote Subscribe/Unsubscribe requests *MUST* implement a minimum timeout of 5 minutes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Remote Subscribe/Unsubscribe requests *MUST* implement a minimum timeout of 5 minutes.

```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-remote-retry-indefinitely~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--

> Timed-out remote commands *MUST* be retried indefinitely until the business logic behind it no longer requires the command to be sent (e.g. because the last entity unsubscribed from a topic that is in state `SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Timed-out remote commands *MUST* be retried indefinitely until the business logic behind it no longer requires the command to be sent (e.g. because the last entity unsubscribed from a topic that is in state `SUBSCRIPTION_PENDING`).

```

--

[#reset-operation]
== Reset

This is a private API, to be used only between uSubscription services. Regular uEs can call Unsubscribe() to flush their own subscriptions.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-reset-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `Reset()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-reset~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When the `Reset()` function is called, the uSubscription service *MUST* flush all stored subscription information.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscription-reset-only-usubscription~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When receiving a `Reset()` call from a source that is not another uSubscription services (i.e. from source URIs where uEntity ID (`ue_id`) does not equal _0x8000_), uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `PERMISSION_DENIED`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When receiving a `Reset()` call from a source that is not another uSubscription services (i.e. from source URIs where uEntity ID (`ue_id`) does not equal _0x0_), uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `PERMISSION_DENIED`.
```

--

== uSubscription Sequences

In the following section, we will elaborate on the various subscription flows for local and remote topics. When a consumer subscribes to a remote topic, it is the responsibility of the (local) uSubscription service to relay the subscription request to the remote uSubscription service as can be seen in the sequence diagrams below.

NOTE: Throughout this section we will use the sample topic `//Device1/uexample/1/resource#Event` to illustrate the various sequences. The above-mentioned topic will be replaced with `_topic_` in the diagrams

=== Subscription

Subscription flow will show how a subscriber can subscribe to the example topic when uApp is on the same device (local subscriptions) or remote device (remote subscriptions).

==== Within a uDevice

.Local Subscription Flow
[mermaid]
ifdef::env-github[[source,mermaid]]
----
sequenceDiagram
    box White Device1
        actor uApp
        participant uSubscription

>         participant NotificationTopic

Reviewer 2: What is Notificationtopic? It is confusing to show it as another lifeline as it is not another uE. Usually I would use different arrow types to indicate if it is a request, response, publish, or notification message and I recommend you do the same in all your diagrams.

    alt success
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: Ok
        local uSubscription-->>local NotificationTopic: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
    else failure
        local uSubscription-->>uApp: Failure
    end

    opt last subscription
        local uSubscription-->>remote uSubscription: Unsubscribe(UnsubscribeRequest)
        alt success
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: Ok
            remote uSubscription-->>remote NotificationTopic: Update(UNSUBSCRIBED)
        else failure
            remote uSubscription-->>local uSubscription: Failure
        end
    end
----

To allow the reverse flow (publication) to be properly multicast to local subscribers by the local disaptcher when it queries the local uSubscription for a list of local subscribers:

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscription-remote_unsubscribe-subscriber-change~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
uSubscription service *MUST* change the subscriber to itself (`core.usubscription`) when unsubscribing to remote topics. 
--

== Open Questions

The following questions are open in the current version of this specification and should be resolved going forward:

> * If a (the last local) client Unsubscribes from a remote topic - should his client-topic relation be set to UNSUBSCRIBED, regardless of whether the remote Unsubscribe call works correctly? What sense would there be in a client-state relation being/remaining UNSUBSCRIBED_PENDING?

Reviewer 2: Yes it should state in UNSUBSCRIBED

> * Implementation-side, seperating client-topic state (what is the subscription state of a specific client wrt a specific topic?) from remote-topic state (what is the global state of a remotely subscribed topic?) makes a lot of sense; put that in the spec?

Reviewer 2: Yes agree but it can be implementation specific (not something that requires writing in the spec IMHO))

Author: agree

> * What happens when Subscribe() is called during UNSUBSCRIBE_PENDING / Unsubscribe() is called during SUBSCRIBE_PENDING?

Reviewer 2: Opperation is cancelled and we go to the desired state.

Author: done

> * Is it expected that a uEntity can register more than one custom topic receiving update notifications?

Reviewer 2: there are no custom topics for receiving notifications.

> * Is it supposed to be possible to register remote UURIs as notification topics?

Reviewer 2: No

> * Do we need update/change notifications when remote SubscriptionResponses come in?

Reviewer 2: **YES!!**

Author: done

In contrast, a remote subscription scenario involves publishers and subscribers using different pubsub implementations and/or being located on different systems. For instance, a client interacting with a co-located MQTT broker to subscribe to messages that originate from a low-level mechatronics device, being published via SOME/IP.

To be workable, the remote subscription scenario requires a dispatcher (`uStreamer`) which is able to forward published messages from one pubsub network to another. To do so intelligently, i.e. only forward traffic that actually is requested by a remote entity, some form of bookkeeping is needed to keep track of local and remote subscriptions, synchronize remote subscription requests with their bookkeeping counterpart on the remote system, and serve as information source for subscription states for the dispatcher entity. 

The `uSubscription` service component provides this bookkeeping capability.  

[#usubscription-publisher]
== Publishers

> Publishers make information available to the uProtocol network, typically by using the mechanisms provided by the uProtocol language library and up-transport implementation appropriate for their context. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Publishers make information available to the uProtocol network, typically by using the mechanisms provided by the uProtocol language library and transport implementation appropriate for their context. 
```

> A Publisher in a uProtocol network ususally does not perform any additional actions beyond what is necessary to publish messages to the up-transport it is using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Publisher in a uProtocol network usually does not perform any additional actions beyond what is necessary to publish messages to the transport it is using.
```

[#usubscription-subscriber]
== Subscribers

> Subscribers receive information from the uProtocol network, typically by using the mechanisms provided by the uProtocol language library and up-transport implementation appropriate for their context. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscribers receive information from the uProtocol network, typically by using the mechanisms provided by the uProtocol language library and transport implementation appropriate for their context. 
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-interaction-subscriber~1"]
--

> In addition to performing the actions necessary to subscribe to and receive messages from the up-transport that they are using, Publishers in a uProtocol network *MUST* interact with their local uSubscription service instance, especially to inform about what messages they `subscribe()` to or `unsubscribe()` from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to performing the actions necessary to subscribe to and receive messages from the transport that they are using, Subscribers in a uProtocol network *MUST* invoke the <<subscribe-operation>> and <<unsubscribe-operation>> operations of their local uSubscription service instance in order to indicate which topics they _subscribe_ to or _unsubscribe_ from.
```

--

> === Subscribe()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#subscribe-operation]
=== Subscribe()
```

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-protobuf~1",oft-needs="impl"]
--
The uSubscription service `Subscribe()` function *MUST* implement the corresponding protobuf definition in link:../up-core-api/uprotocol/core/uSubscription/v3/usubscription.proto[usubscription.proto].
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* store the client as a subscriber of the provided topic for the duration of the uSubscription service runtime (no persistency across service restarts).
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-multiple~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already registered for, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a response message containing the current subscription status for this client-topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function for a topic that it is already subscribed on, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a response message containing the current subscription status for this client-topic combination (e.g. `SUBSCRIBED` or `SUBSCRIBE_PENDING`).
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-notifications~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> When a client calls the `Subscribe()` function, uSubscription service *MUST* generate subscription change notifications that indicate any change of subscription state of the subscribed topic.

Reviewer: FMPOV this does not belong here but instead should be specified as part of the `RegisterForNotifications` operation.
These notifications are only sent **if** the client indeed registers a corresponding listener, or am I mistaken?

Author: As far as I understand the original spec, the general/default notification channel should always get subscription change notifications. RegisterForNotifications is for setting a custom, client-specific topic/channel to receive these notifications on.

Not saying that I am unwilling to change any of this, but this is how I read the original intent.

Reviewer: You are the expert :-)

Author: Only relatively speaking ;-) - but let's keep this on the backburner for potential future evolution.

--

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-not-empty~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-not-empty~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
```

--

> Topic URIs used in uSubscription `Subscribe()` calls *MUST NOT* be empty. When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with an empty topic, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with an empty topic, uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
```

--

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-authority~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[.specitem,oft-sid="dsn~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-authority~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
```

--

> Topic URIs used in uSubscription `Subscribe()` calls *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `authority`. When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with a wildcard topic authority, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with a topic that contains a _wildcard_ authority, a uSubscription service *MUST* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-entity-id~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription `Subscribe()` calls *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `ue_id`. When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with an wildcard topic ue_id, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~usubscribe-subscribe-topic-resource-id~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
Topic URIs used in uSubscription `Subscribe()` calls *MUST* contain a specific (non-wildcard) `resource_id`. When receiving a `Subscribe()` call with an wildcard topic resource_id, uSubscription service *SHALL* return a failure status message with link:../../../up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/ucode.proto[`UCode`] `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.
--

> === Unsubscribe()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#unsubscribe-operation]
=== Unsubscribe()
```
